RAT Integration (#225)
usds/SME-QA-Website: pages/phases/reviewing-resumes/prep.md

sidenav: hiring-phases
phase: reviewing-resumes
sub-phase-order: 010

> intro: Prior to training subject matter experts to review resumes, prepare the applications that they'll review, select the tools you will use to have the SMEs conduct review review, and decide if you will have 2 SMEs review each resume plus a tiebreaker or pursue a different approach. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intro: To prepare for resume review, you will set up your training materials, identify practice resumes, select the tooling you and SMEs will use to track results, and decide your review method (2 SMEs plus a tiebreaker or a different approach). 
```

Instead of reviewing resumes to determine minimum qualification, review the technical justification that SMEs provide to make sure their decision can be retraced later on. As HR specialist, you'll adjudicate veterans' preference after SMEs conduct phone assessment interviews.

### Decide on a Resume Review Platform for your SMEs

> 1. Create accounts for your SMEs to log onto your talent aquisition system to conduct their review. Monster customers who piloted SME-QA have used the Collaborate add-on to have SMEs review resumes and leave notes for HR to review. We have instructions manuals available upon request. USA Staffing customers can create "hiring manger" roles for the SMEs and assign stored lists for a pair of SMEs to review.  SMEs can leave their feedback in the "notes" field and HR can create a third stored list for the tiebreaker. In this process, SMEs have to reference the required competencies/proficiencies in a separate file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If needed, create talent acquisition system accounts for your SMEs to access resumes and/or conduct reviews. 
  1. Monster customers who piloted SME-QA used the Collaborate add-on to have SMEs review resumes and leave notes for HR to review. We have instructions manuals available upon request. 
  2. USA Staffing customers can create "hiring manger" roles for the SMEs and assign stored lists for a pair of SMEs to review.  SMEs can leave their feedback in the "notes" field and HR can create a third stored list for the tiebreaker. In this process, SMEs have to reference the required competencies/proficiencies in a separate file. 
  3. If you distribute resumes via e-mail and SMEs record results indepentantly (such as in excel), then you enter all of the results into the talent acquisition system, you can bypass this step.
```

> *Lessons learned from our pilots*: SMEs conducting resume review in USA Staffing found the 15-minute time outs after inactivity to be a significant challenge to completing this work.  They also struggled with remembering every requirement they had to review since their feedback was in a free-form notes field. HR had to send a lot of reviews back to SMEs to redo and clarify. Using USA Staffing for the resume review phase took took 19 and 12 days to complete in our first two pilots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Lessons learned from our pilots*: SMEs struggled with USA Staffing timing them out after 15 minutes of inactivity.  They also struggled to remember every requirement for their review, since their feedback was in a free-form notes field. HR had to send a lot of reviews back to SMEs to redo and clarify. Using USA Staffing for the resume review phase took took 19 and 12 days to complete in our first two pilots.
```

> 2.  Batch download applicant resumes and send SMEs an excel chart with their assignments. There, SMEs can detail which competencies/proficiencies are met and can send the excel chart back to HR. If your agency is having two SMEs plus a tiebreaker review each resume, HR will want to merge the excel files and send a new assignment list to a third SME with any disagreements.  A sample excel chart for this purpose can be found in the Resume Review Toolkit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Option 2 - SMEs work using standard office tooling.
 - HR will batch download applicant resumes to distribute to SMEs and send their assignments in a chart (excel or equivalent).
- SMEs will detail which competencies/proficiencies are met and can send the excel chart back to you. 
- If using two SMEs plus a tiebreaker, HR will merge the excel files and send a new assignment list to a third SME with any disagreements.  A sample excel chart for this purpose can be found in the Resume Review Toolkit.
```

*Lessons learned from our pilots*:  In our third, the agency that used this approach was able to make resume review even more fair to applicants by manually blacking out the names of every applicant before sharing the batch download to the SMEs. In the excel tool, each applicant was assigned an identifying number. Having a dedicated HR project manager who could quickly merge and send out new lists helped the agency complete this step in only 5 days.

> 3. USDS has partnered with OPM to build and test a resume review tool to expediate the resume review stage and ensure objectivity from SMEs. View the demo of this tool here: https://smeqa-demo.app.cloud.gov/login. Resumes must be separately batch downloaded and emailed to the participating SMEs. This tool automates the process of every resume needing two reviews and a tiebreaker if necessary. It also ensures SMEs can not see each others' decision. It allows HR to approve or reject the justification statements written by SMEs and provide them with feedback on their review. Finally, it gives HR metrics in real time regarding how many reviews are remaining.  This tool uses OPM's cloud.gov account and OPM's login.gov instance. It has an interium authority to operate and is available for testing in a limited number of pilots. In FY21 OPM plans to integrate these features direclty into USA Staffing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Option 3 - use the cloud-hosted resume review tool
USDS has partnered with OPM to build and test a resume review tool to expedite the resume review stage and ensure objectivity from SMEs. View the demo of this tool here: https://smeqa-demo.app.cloud.gov/login. Resumes must be separately batch downloaded and emailed to the participating SMEs. This tool automates the process of every resume needing two reviews and a tiebreaker if necessary. It also ensures SMEs can not see each others' decision. It allows HR to approve or reject the justification statements written by SMEs and provide them with feedback on their review. Finally, it gives HR metrics in real time regarding how many reviews are remaining.  This tool uses OPM's cloud.gov account and OPM's login.gov instance. It has an interium authority to operate and is available for testing in a limited number of pilots. In FY21 OPM plans to integrate these features direclty into USA Staffing.
```

> *Lessons learned from our pilots*: Two agencies recently piloted the Resume Review Tool and both were able to complete the resume review step in under a week.  Both agencies had 10-15 SMEs participating in resume review and this tool helped ensure the SMEs were remembering to only evaluate the applicants against the pre-defined proficiencies plus any additional requirements (52 weeks in grade, recency requirements, etc). This tool greatly reduced the work required by HR in setting up any lists and merging any lists. However, SMEs complained that the resumes were not integrated directly into the tool. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Lessons learned from our pilots*: Two agencies recently piloted the Resume Review Tool and both were able to complete the resume review step in under a week.  Both agencies had 10-15 SMEs participating in resume review and this tool helped ensure the SMEs only evaluated the applicants against the pre-defined proficiencies and any additional requirements (52 weeks in grade, recency requirements, etc). This tool greatly reduced the work required by HR in setting up any lists and merging any lists. However, SMEs complained about the friction of finding resumes in the batch download and asked for them to integrated into the tool. 
```
